---
title: 17 June 2022
description: In this update, we’ll mainly focus on our work on the Biodiversity Metric Tool as we wrap up its discovery. We’ll also share updates on our Register, Operator and Credit projects. 
---

## Hello!

In this update, we’ll mainly focus on our work on the Biodiversity Metric Tool as we wrap up its discovery. We’ll also share updates on our Register, Operator and Credit projects. 
 

## Metric update

### What is the Metric

The Metric aspect of the Biodiversity Net Gain programme is a means of calculating the number of habitat units on a site. It is based on the identification of different habitat types, conditions and areas within a site. The Metric is currently at version 3:1, a spreadsheet with locked-down calculations. 


### What was the problem we were trying to understand?

In Discovery, we wanted to know find the answers to 3 main questions:  
1. Who is using the Metric? 
2. In what context do people use it? 
3. What problems do they have?


### Findings and what we did

We now have a good understanding of who is using the Metric and how they are using it. We also know where a lot of the problems are and how these can be improved.

### Users

We spoke with 30 people, including people from ecological consultancies, local planning authorities (LPAs), habitat non-government organisations, staff from Defra and Natural England, and land developers.

We found that most of the Metric’s users were ecologists. They had a lot of background knowledge and expertise in understanding habitat types and conditions. They used the Metric to understand baseline habitat and the effects of developments and often shared that information with other disciplines.

We found that some Metric users working for LPAs weren’t ecologists. These users often reviewed the Metric and struggled to understand the details. We also found that some land developers used the Metric to roughly estimate the number of habitat units before planning or purchasing a site.

We found that most people start survey and planning work on a map. They export data from the map into a spreadsheet and then into the Metric.


### Problems

Many usability issues came up during our discovery. For example, we found:
* there was too much scrolling (up, down, left, right) made it difficult to read
* it could be difficult to understand the calculations and trading rules
* it was difficult to make changes to data once in the Metric – particularly when a habitat area was split (some lost, some retained or enhanced)

There were also issues with the content of both the Metric and its guidance.


### Recommendations

Several recommendations came out of our discovery.

One was to integrate the Metric with a GIS mapping tool. This might be a Metric calculation layer in an existing GIS tool, or a GIS tool within the Metric itself.

Another was to fix the issues with usability and content. As part of this:
* allow data to be more easily reviewed 
* support changes to the data such as being able to split habitat areas to reflect where some habitat is lost because land is developed, but other areas may have improved habitat 
* illustrate calculations that underpin the habitat scores  
* consider whether Excel can support these changes  
* identify whether non-Ecologists can (or even should) be supported better 


### Decisions and next steps

The focus will be on making the current Metric more useable, with a longer term aim of scoping out options to move the Metric from a spreadsheet.   


## Register update

Over the past month we’ve been laying the foundations for our Beta phase, following [us passing our Alpha service assessment](https://www.gov.uk/service-standard-reports/biodiversity-net-gain-digital-service) in early April. Beta is where we’ll start building the Register for real, and do more in-depth testing with users to iterate as we go.

Several things have been happening to help us lay this groundwork, including:  
* inducting new members to our team 
* setting up the development environment and code to build 
* prioritising user stories ready for building 
* design and user research on the registering journey and the public view of the Register 
* recruiting more users to participate in research – [let us know if you’re interested](https://forms.office.com/Pages/ResponsePage.aspx?id=UCQKdycCYkyQx044U38RAumMI3xQ9flPiyClGa-zxKdUQVBaTzRGUlBYMlUzMkZIWkpSRjM3R0EwVi4u)

Finally, we’ve also refreshed our vision statement. This is the north star to guide work on the Register and where we want to go with it:
> “**The Biodiversity Net Gain Register** will ensure trust and transparency in nature’s recovery. It will be the public record of legitimate and accountable biodiversity gains across the country. The register will show where, what, and how habitats are being created and enhanced by development.”


## Operator update 

The Operator team has been busy working on the Alpha phase of the project. The latest sprints have been focussed on confirming the current testable verification requirements with Natural England.

We have shared our vision with stakeholder groups based on our current assumptions:
> "to support operator staff in the verification and registration of off-site biodiversity gains with a consistent and prompt procedure.” 

We are also very pleased to welcome Paul Doyle to the team as a PowerApp developer. 

Next steps will involve us conducting user research sessions with the newly recruited Operator team.  


## Credit Sales Service update

The Credit team have been busy with the first couple of sprints within the alpha phase. This has included building a prototype that demonstrates a potential user journey and then using the prototype as a conversational tool within our User Research sessions.

The other main activities have centred around understanding some of the technology constraints and capturing the flow of data through our journey. We have also welcomed a new developer, Rene Lintoge.

Our next steps are to refine the prototype further, based on feedback from users and stakeholders, and conduct more user research sessions. 
