---
title: 21 February 2022
description: Over the past few weeks, a lot has changed, three brand new teams have been created and the “Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) Digital Services programme” has been formed.
---

## Hello!

Over the past few weeks, a lot has changed, three brand new teams have been created and the “Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) Digital Services programme” has been formed.

Now that the programme has all of its core teams, we feel that the format of this blog should now change to showcase all of the great work across the programme.

Moving forward we aim to publish a fortnightly blog, packed with news and updates from each of the four teams.

To kick off this new format we wanted to introduce you to new teams.

So, the programme is made up of four core delivery teams who are all working on digital services connected to Biodiversity Net Gain.

**Register, Operator, Credit Sales and Metric** will be working together to support the BNG Vision; “Advancing nature's recovery by supporting development to achieve lasting benefits for people, places, and the natural world”.
 

## Introducing the Register team (Currently in Alpha, with their service assessment early March)

The Environment Act (2021) requires developers to deliver a ‘biodiversity net gain’ as a condition of their planning permission. To deliver biodiversity gains, habitats can be enhanced on the developers own building site, or at an offsite location, by paying a landowner to use their land.

The Biodiversity Gain Site Register has been set up to support this new mandatory BNG requirement, the Bill also introduces a Biodiversity Gain Site Register, which will need to record all sites delivering local off-site BNG (Biodiversity Gain Sites) and be publicly accessible.

> ##The Register team's problem statement is:
The Environment Act (2021) requires developers to deliver a ‘biodiversity net gain’ as a condition of their planning permission. To deliver biodiversity gains, habitats can be enhanced on the developers own building site, or at an offsite location, by paying a landowner to use their land.

Before these offsite biodiversity gains can be used, they need to be verified by Government and the local planning authorities, to ensure they are:

* Legitimate – biodiversity gains are in line with legislative requirements and have the necessary legal agreements in place
* Accountable – biodiversity gains can be linked back to the developer paying for them and are not being used fraudulently
* Transparent – the right information about biodiversity gains has been gathered and is publicly accessible to maintain confident in the biodiversity net gain approach


## Introducing Register Operator team (Currently in Discovery, due to move to Alpha in February)

The role of the operator is the "verify and manage" - this includes verifying off-site BNG applications to the register.

The team are currently look at interactions with the wider teams, what checks could be automated and system interoperability.

> ##The Register Operator team’s problem statement is:
Determine the best approach to deliver a case management solution to support the BNG service vision - build, buy or build on existing software.


## Introducing the Credit Sales team (Currently in Discovery)

The team's discovery goal is to find out if the introduction of BNG credit sales can help our users advance nature’s recovery without delaying their planning applications.

> ###The Credit Sales Service team’s problem statement is:**
How can developers secure planning permission for their projects, while meeting the mandatory BNG requirements of the Environment Act 2021.


## Introducing the Biodiversity Metric Tool team (Currently in Discovery)

The team’s intention for their discovery is to keep everything, including the calculations and underlying architecture in the metric the same and focus on, to what extent, the pros and cons are of taking the analogue format into digital. Play the advantages and disadvantages back to Defra.

> ###The Biodiversity Metric Tool team's problem statement is:**
"We would love to have a digital metric"


## The past 2 weeks on the Biodiversity Gain Site Register Project

### Mock Assessment
We started our most recent sprint with a mock [alpha assessment](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/service-assessments/how-service-assessments-work). This was our chance to have a practice run with a panel of assessors before the real thing in early March.

Whilst this made for a busy week of preparing slides, we were happy with how it went, and have received some positive and constructive feedback for us to improve upon.

### Iterate, iterate, iterate

As well as the assessment prep, our work on building prototypes and testing different ideas with users has continued. This is helping us learn how users approach and interact with our service from different angles and with different needs. 

For instance, whilst our prototype has been designed with all our users in mind, we’re finding that what a landowner or land agent needs from our service is different to what a developer or consultant needs. We’ll continue exploring design and content solutions for this as we go into the [Beta phase](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/agile-delivery/how-the-beta-phase-works).

### Making an inclusive service
Making our service [accessible to everyone](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/helping-people-to-use-your-service/assisted-digital-support-introduction) who needs it is a crucial goal for our project. To achieve this, we’re exploring the needs of users who require assisted digital support, and [adapting our design](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/helping-people-to-use-your-service/designing-assisted-digital) to help them.

For instance, some users are finding large chunks of text difficult to read and want a way to save their work and return to it later. Encouragingly we’ve so far found these users like the simple design of our service, and particularly our one question per page eligibility checks before starting the full registering process. This is easy to understand and prevents them getting stuck later.

We’ll be continuing to do accessibility testing throughout Beta and explore offline routes for those unable to use digital services.

## What’s next for the Register team?

Over the next couple of weeks our focus is on getting ready for our alpha assessment. We’re going to be tidying up our slides, organising our narrative, and doing practice runs.

We’ve also got more user research booked in to test some new iterations on our prototype, particularly around how we collect data about habitats to prevent ‘double counting’ of biodiversity units.
And finally, we’ve started some initial discovery work into what users will need from our register when they want to search and view data on it. More to come on this soon!

If you’d like to learn more about any of our work, please get in touch at <BiodiversityNGDevelopment@NaturalEngland.org.uk>.


## The past 2 weeks on the Register Operator Project

We have been working on finalising the Discovery outputs. We have prepared a draft Discovery presentation and have been working on our end of Discovery Show and Tell. We delivered a ‘dry run’ presentation to the BNG Digital Services Team meeting and we have incorporated their feedback into our presentation.

We have been adapting our User Research plan and investigating our highest risk hypotheses.

## What’s next for the Register Operator team?

We present our Discovery ‘Show and Tell’ to the Programme Board on 28th February. We are planning to then achieve approval to move to the Alpha phase of delivery. Much of Discovery has been business focussed, we will now shift the focus to become more user centric.

We will start working much closer with the other teams in Alpha in order to provide a seamless end to end service.


## The past 2 weeks on the Credit Sales Project

Understanding our users’ needs are one of the main goals of Discovery. To support this, we have been conducted two rounds of User Research with a number of Ecologists, Planning Consultants and Developers (11 individual sessions in total). We are analysing the information captured during these sessions in order to translate it into useful insight.

We have drafted a ‘To Be’ process for Credit Sales and set about holding Stakeholder sessions to walk through the process and obtain their feedback in order to validate & refine our process.

On Wednesday 16th Feb we presented our mid-Discovery Show and Tell. The virtual session was well attended and we received encouraging feedback in regards what we had been doing.


## What’s next for the Credit Sales team?
We will be holding full debriefing sessions in terms of the User Research carried out within rounds 1 and 2. We will also be preparing for Round 3 where we will be looking to engage with a different user group, that being Local Planning Authorities.

There are some further stakeholder sessions planned for this coming week. This will allow us to continue to walk through the To Be process for Credit Sales before completing a final draft for review.

If you’d like to learn more about any of our work, please get in touch at <CreditSalesDiscoveryTeam@defra.gov.uk>.


## The past 2 weeks on the Metric Tool Project

We are working as a team to agree and deliver our Discovery outputs.

We have been incorporating new team members and ramping up Discovery delivery. One of the main objectives has been planning User Research and agreeing the scope. We held a workshop with wider stakeholders in order to collaborate and agree on the approach.

User research interviews with Local Planning Authorities and Ecologists are commencing week commencing 21st February.


## What’s next for the Metric tool team?

We will ramp up delivery of user research activities, working collaboratively as a team. We will follow up user research interviews and synthesise the results.  We will plan a mid-Discovery ‘Show and Tell’ to share with the wider team.





